So now that we've talked
about some of the key classes
at a high level, we've
talked about ForkJoinPool,
we've talked about
ForkJoinTask, we've
talked about RecursiveAction
and RecursiveTask,
let's start looking in more
detail for the various methods
defined in those classes,
beginning with ForkJoinPool.
So as you can see,
there's about maybe
a dozen interesting
methods in ForkJoinPool.
We're not going to
talk about all of them.
But we're going to talk
about the ones that
are the most interesting.
So first and foremost, remember
that ForkJoinPool extends
the AbstractExecutorService,
which,
in turn, extends or implements
the ExecutorService.
And therefore, it
implements all the methods
that ExecutorService defines.
So it implements execute,
submit, invoke all, invoke any.
And these are methods that
we covered at some length
in the context of my concurrent
object-oriented programming
course.
So if you want to really
get a sense of that,
you might want to
go back and re-watch
some of those lessons just to
remember what we talked about.
Execute arranges for the
asynchronous execution
of a one-way task, which, of
course, is implemented here
by a runnable.
No value is returned from that.
It just runs it asynchronously.
If you need a value,
you'll have to do it
through some other means,
like a side effect,
like printing something
or sending a message
or putting something on a queue.
Submit, in contrast,
takes a callable
and uses it as a two-way task.
So two-way means that we give it
a task to do, it does its work,
and then a result will
eventually be generated.
And we'll get the result back.
But we don't get the
result back directly.
Instead, we get the
result back via a Future.
And this is kind of a classic
Java 5 future, not a cool Java
CompletableFuture that we
will be talking about later.
Invoke all can be used to run
all the tasks in the collection
and then wait for
them all to finish.
And invoke any
can be used to run
all the task and a collection
and wait for the first of them
to finish.
And then the other with
others will be canceled,
and their results
will be ignored.
So that's all well and good.
That's kind of a
summary of what we
had talked about in
our earlier discussions
of the concurrent
object-oriented programming
abstractions in the
Java Executor framework.
However, these
methods don't really
leverage the powerful
ForkJoinPool features.
So they don't submit
ForkJoinTasks,
so they can't be doing
all the cool things you
can do with a ForkJoinTask.
So we're just going to
skip over them for now.
You can go back and
watch the earlier videos
in the other course
if you really
are interested in knowing
what the semantics are
of these methods.
Instead, we're going to
focus on the key methods
that ForkJoinPool provides that
allows non-ForkJoinTask clients
to submit ForkJoinTasks.
And again, we'll talk
a bit more about this,
because it's a little hard to
get your head around at first.
But the way to think about
this is ForkJoinTasks really
want to run in the context
of the ForkJoinPool's worker
threads.
But somehow we have to get them
in there in the first place.
And these methods are
kind of the entry point
into the world of ForkJoinTask
running in the ForkJoinPool.
So it's how you get
non-ForkJoinTask clients
to submit ForkJoinTasks
to the pool.
And as you can see,
there are three methods.
These methods can
and do leverage
the powerful properties
of the ForkJoinPool.
Let's take a look at
the execute method.
This method is actually
not that different
from the execute method that
takes a runnable in the sense
that it's going to have
a one-way operation.
But it's going to execute
a ForkJoinTask rather than
a runnable.
The invoke method is
kind of interesting.
There really, I don't think,
is quite an equivalent
of this in the context of the
ExecutorService interface.
Because invoke is actually
going to be a two-way call.
So when you call invoke,
it runs the ForkJoinTask,
and then it waits
for that result
and gives the result
back synchronously.
So this call will block until
the ForkJoinTask is done.
And then the last
method here is submit.
And submit will pass a
ForkJoinTask for execution
into the fork-join framework,
but it won't block.
It'll return a ForkJoinTask,
which is a Future.
And so we can then go back
later and join on that
and get the results back after
the Future has completed.
Now, one of the
questions we have here
is, how big is a ForkJoinPool?
If you create an instance
of the ForkJoinPool,
and you don't do anything
other than call the default
constructor, the size
of that ForkJoinPool
will default to
the number of cores
that are available and known
to the underlying Java runtime.
So if we call this constructor,
what will happen under the hood
is it will use the
Runtime.getRunti
me.availableProcessors
method, which
will return the number
of processor cores
that the Java execution
environment thinks
are configured on
that platform, which
will depend on the number of
cores and the type of cores.
For example, on my quad-core,
hyper-threaded processor,
I get back the
value 8 from this.
Because they're hyper-thread.
They're virtual cores.
You could also select the
size programmatically.
So you can say, hey,
I want you to create
me a ForkJoinPool
that is going to have
n worker threads running in it.
And you can control n.
Now, why on earth
would you ever not
just default to the
available processors?
Well, the reason you
might want to do this
would be several fold.
First, you might want to
have a ForkJoinPool that
has a lot more threads
than you have cores,
because you know you're
going to be blocking.
So that would be one reason.
Another reason to do this
is you might actually
want to restrict
the number of cores
to be fewer than the
number of available cores
on the platform.
And that might be
because you don't
want to end up basically
overtaxing the processing
for your application.
You want to leave some
other cores around
to do other kinds of stuff.
Then, of course, there's
also the common ForkJoinPool.
And this can always be
accessed via a static method.
So if you take a
look here, you can
see that there's a static
field called common,
which is of type ForkJoinPool.
And you can see it's final.
So it's going to
get set basically
in the constructor for this.
And the common pool static
method simply returns common.
So what this says is when the
constructor for ForkJoinPool
is run, then this
ForkJoinPool static field
is going to be set.
And now that's
important to remember,
because when we
talk later about how
you can change the size
of the number of threads
in the common ForkJoinPool
via a system property,
you always have to
make sure that you
set that system property
before the first ForkJoinPool
is created.
Because once you
create one of them,
you can't reset that size.
Because it's only set
in the constructor.
This common pool is
used by any ForkJoinTask
that is not explicitly
submitted to a specified pool.
And obviously, the most
common way this is used,
as far as we are concerned
in our discussion of Java
parallel-functioning
programming frameworks,
is for the parallel streams
framework, which always
uses the common
pool-- or not always,
but effectively,
always uses it, always
should use the common pool.
There are various hacks
to work around this,
but they're not really
guaranteed to be stable.
ForkJoinPool, in addition to
the methods we've talked about,
also provides
various other methods
that are used for
managing the pool
and monitoring the
way it behaves.
And believe it or not, we're
actually going to talk about
and showcase some of
these methods later.
So I want to spend a little
time talking about them now.
So getParallelism will return
the target parallelism level
of this pool, which is typically
either whatever the default was
if you used the constructor that
took no parameters, on the one
hand, or it will be whatever
you passed in when you
went ahead and created a
ForkJoinPool with a designated
pool size.
getPoolSize returns the
number of worker threads
that have started but
have not yet terminated.
What the heck does that mean?
Well, when you start using
things like the ManagedBlocker
interface and the
managedBlock method that's
defined on
ManagedBlocker, you'll
see that it's possible
for the number of worker
threads in the pool to
automagically increase
based on whether or
not the processing
tasks you're giving to it are
going to be blocking or not.
And as the threads
increase, then you
may end up with a point
where the size of the pool
is actually bigger
than the original size
that you specified when
you created the pool.
This is particularly true--
this is really, primarily
true, maybe only true,
for the common
ForkJoinPool, which
is the one that has the
ManagedBlocker mechanism built
into it.
As it turns out,
if you have threads
that are created via the
ManagedBlocker mechanism,
if they're unused for a
certain period of time,
then they will be automatically
reclaimed and terminated.
So getPoolSize will tell you
how big the pool has grown.
There's another
helper method called
get QueuedSubmissionCount,
which returns
an estimate of the
number of tasks
submitted to the pool that
haven't started to run yet.
So that's kind of like looking
out the window at a concert
and saying, oh, we have lots
people lined up out front.
They haven't gotten in yet.
Maybe we should wait
for the band to start,
until everybody's seated.
So that's basically how many
things are in the queue.
And then the final method
we're going to talk about here
is really quite interesting.
And this will come up later
in next week's lesson,
when we talk about the
various application
styles, various programming
styles for using
the ForkJoinPool.
This is the method
called getStealCount.
And it returns an estimate
of the total number
of tasks that have been
stolen from one thread's work
queue, or their deck,
by another thread.
And so you'll see, as we
talk about different styles
for programming with
the ForkJoinPool,
some ways of programming
with a ForkJoinPool end
up with very large steal counts.
And one of the
consequences of having
very large steal counts is
the overhead of stealing
is non-trivial.
And so your performance
may degrade.
Other ways of programming with
a ForkJoinPool, as we will see,
end up doing something called
recursive decomposition.
And this ends up
spreading around the tasks
in the pool of threads
more evenly, in which case
the steal count
typically goes way down.
Because there's no need to
steal from other threads' decks,
because you've got plenty
of work in your own deck.
So we'll kind of get a sense of
this when we show, and compare
and contrast, the alternative
programming models.
You'll get a better feeling
for why the steal count matters
and what the steal count means.
So keep in mind, this
getStealCount method is there.
We'll use it in some
interesting ways
later to explain
differences in performance.